---
path: "/1"
title: "Problem 1"
---

## Bruce force solution

This problem can be solved with "brute force" pretty easily. We could loop over
the natural numbers from 1 to 999 and sum them if they meet the criteria. This
solution's execution time would scale linearly with the number of numbers to
evaluate. We could state this a little more formally in Big O notionation.

$$
T(n) = O(n)
$$

This solution may be acceptable for small numbers, but we might want to be more
creative as n grows. Let's look at summations.

## Summations

Consider the sum of the digits 1 through 9.

$$
S_9 = \sum_{i=1}^{9} i
$$

Enumerate the digits and group them so that each group has the same sum.

$$
\begin{aligned}
S_9 &= 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 + 7 + 8 + 9 \\
&= 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 + 7 + 8 + 9 \\
&= (1 + 9) + (2 + 8) + (3 + 7) + (4 + 6) + 5 \\
&= 10 + 10 + 10 + 10 + 5 \\
&= 4 \cdot 10 + 5 \\
&= \cfrac{9 \cdot 10}{2} \\
&= \cfrac{9 (9 + 1)}{2} \\
\end{aligned}
$$

We won't prove it here, but this finding can be generalized. The sum of the
first _n_ whole numbers, 1 through _n_, is

$$
S_n = \sum_{i=1}^{n} i = \cfrac{n (n + 1)}{2}.
$$

We're now very close to a constant-time, $ T(n) = O(1) $, solution. Notice
that the formula for $ S_n $ does not grow in complexity as _n_ grows. The
number of opperations is the same: an addition, a multiplication, and a
division.

## Constant-time solution

In this problem we need to sum the multiples of 3 and 5. As is, our formula for
$ S_n $ cannot handle multiples. Let's consider a sum of the first 10 muliples of 3. This could be represented as

$$
S_{10,3\mathrm{rd}} = \sum_{i=1}^{n} 3 i = 3 \sum_{i=1}^{n} i = \cfrac{3n (n + 1)}{2}.
$$

The case will be similar for mutiples of 5. We simply need to determine _how
many_ mutiples of 3 and 5 should be added. And make sure you don't double count
numbers that are a multiple of both 3 and 5!
